
 
 Two TEN QUESTIONS O n the paper was written:   Things needing explanation.   The handkerchief marked with the initial H. Whose is it? The pipe cleaner. Was it dropped by Colonel Arbuthnot? Or by someone else? Who wore the scarlet kimono? Who was the man or woman masquerading in Wagon Lit uniform? Why do the hands of the watch point to 1:15? Was the murder committed at that time? Was it earlier? Was it later? Can we be sure that Ratchett was stabbed by more than one person? What other explanation of his wounds can there be? 
 “Well, let us see what we can do,” said M. Bouc, brightening a little at this challenge to his wits. “The handkerchief to begin with. Let us by all means be orderly and methodical.” “Assuredly,” said Poirot, nodding his head in a satisfied fashion. M. Bouc continued somewhat didactically. “The initial H is connected with three people—Mrs. Hubbard, Miss Debenham, whose second name is Hermione, and the maid Hildegarde Schmidt.” “Ah! And of those three?” “It is difficult to say. But I  think  I should vote for Miss Debenham. For all one knows, she may be called by her second name and not her first. Also there is already some suspicion attaching to her. That conversation you overheard,  mon cher,  was certainly a little curious, and so is her refusal to explain it.” “As for me, I plump for the American,” said Dr. Constantine. “It is a very expensive handkerchief that, and Americans, as all the world knows, do not care what they pay.” “So you both eliminate the maid?” asked Poirot. “Yes. As she herself said, it is the handkerchief of a member of the upper classes.” “And the second question—the pipe cleaner. Did Colonel Arbuthnot drop it, or somebody else?” “That is more difficult. The English, they do not stab. You are right there. I incline to the view that someone else dropped the pipe cleaner—and did so to incriminate the long-legged Englishman.” “As you said, M. Poirot,” put in the doctor, “ two  clues is too much carelessness. I agree with M. Bouc. The handkerchief was a genuine oversight—hence no one will admit that it is theirs. The  pipe cleaner is a faked clue. In support of that theory, you notice that Colonel Arbuthnot shows no embarrassment and admits freely to smoking a pipe and using that type of cleaner.” “You reason well,” said Poirot. “Question No. 3—who wore the scarlet kimono?” went on M. Bouc. “As to that I will confess I have not the slightest idea. Have you any views on the subject, Dr. Constantine?” “None.” “Then we confess ourselves beaten there. The next question has, at any rate, possibilities. Who was the man or woman masquerading in Wagon Lit uniform? Well, one can say with certainty a number of people whom it could  not  be. Hardman, Colonel Arbuthnot, Foscarelli, Count Andrenyi and Hector MacQueen are all too tall. Mrs. Hubbard, Hildegarde Schmidt and Greta Ohlsson are too broad. That leaves the valet, Miss Debenham, Princess Dragomiroff and Countess Andrenyi—and none of them sounds likely! Greta Ohlsson in one case and Antonio Foscarelli in the other both swear that Miss Debenham and the valet never left their compartments, Hildegarde Schmidt swears to the Princess being in hers, and Count Andrenyi has told us that his wife took a sleeping draught. Therefore it seems impossible that it can be anybody—which is absurd!” “As our old friend Euclid says,” murmured Poirot. “It must be one of those four,” said Dr. Constantine. “Unless it is someone from outside who has found a hiding place—and that, we agreed, was impossible.” M. Bouc had passed on to the next question on the list. “No. 5—why do the hands of the broken watch point to 1:15? I can see two explanations of that. Either it was done by the mur derer to establish an alibi and afterwards he was prevented from leaving the compartment when he meant to do so by hearing people moving about, or else—wait—I have an idea coming—” The other two waited respectfully while M. Bouc struggled in mental agony. “I have it,” he said at last. “It was  not  the Wagon Lit murderer who tampered with the watch! It was the person we have called the Second Murderer—the left-handed person—in other words the woman in the scarlet kimono. She arrives later and moves back the hands of the watch in order to make an alibi for herself.” “Bravo,” said Dr. Constantine. “It is well imagined, that.” “In fact,” said Poirot, “she stabbed him in the dark, not realizing that he was dead already, but somehow deduced that he had a watch in his pyjama pocket, took it out, put back the hands blindly and gave it the requisite dent.” M. Bouc looked at him coldly. “Have you anything better to suggest yourself?” he asked. “At the moment—no,” admitted Poirot. “All the same,” he went on, “I do not think you have either of you appreciated the most interesting point about that watch.” “Does question No. 6 deal with it?” asked the doctor. “To that question—was the murder committed at that time—1:15—I answer, ‘ No. ’” “I agree,” said M. Bouc. “‘Was it earlier?’ is the next question. I say yes. You, too, doctor?” The doctor nodded. “Yes, but the question ‘Was it later?’ can also be answered in the affirmative. I agree with your theory, M. Bouc, and so, I think,  does M. Poirot, although he does not wish to commit himself. The First Murderer came earlier than 1:15, the Second Murderer came  after  1:15. And as regards the question of left-handedness, ought we not to take steps to ascertain which of the passengers is left-handed?” “I have not completely neglected that point,” said Poirot. “You may have noticed that I made each passenger write either a signature or an address. That is not conclusive, because some people do certain actions with the right hand and others with the left. Some write right-handed, but play golf left-handed. Still it is something. Every person questioned took the pen in their right hand—with the exception of Princess Dragomiroff, who refused to write.” “Princess Dragomiroff, impossible,” said M. Bouc. “I doubt if she would have had the strength to inflict that particular left-handed blow,” said Dr. Constantine dubiously. “That particular wound had been inflicted with considerable force.” “More force than a woman could use?” “No, I would not say that. But I think more force than an elderly woman could display, and Princess Dragomiroff’s physique is particularly frail.” “It might be a question of the influence of mind over body,” said Poirot. “Princess Dragomiroff has great personality and immense will power. But let us pass from that for the moment.” “To questions Nos. 9 and 10. Can we be sure that Ratchett was stabbed by more than one person, and what other explanation of the wounds can there be? In my opinion, medically speaking, there can be  no other  explanation of those wounds. To suggest that one man struck first feebly and then with violence, first with the  right hand and then with the left, and after an interval of perhaps half an hour inflicted fresh wounds on a dead body—well, it does not make sense.” “No,” said Poirot. “It does not make sense. And you think that two murderers do make sense?” “As you yourself have said, what other explanation can there be?” Poirot stared straight ahead of him. “That is what I ask myself,” he said. “That is what I never cease to ask myself.” He leaned back in his seat. “From now on, it is all here,” he tapped himself on the forehead. “We have thrashed it all out. The facts are all in front of us—neatly arranged with order and method. The passengers have sat here, one by one, giving their evidence. We know all that can be known— from outside. …” He gave an affectionate smile at M. Bouc. “It has been a little joke between us, has it not—this business of sitting back and  thinking  out the truth? Well, I am about to put my theory into practice—here before your eyes. You two must do the same. Let us all three close our eyes and  think. …” “One or more of those passengers killed Ratchett.  Which of them? ” 
 